# Predictive-Healthcare-Analysis-of-Elevens-Disease-Categories
Waree Protprommart
CSCI E-116

# Project purpose and motivation
## Objective
When we look back at human history, there was a period when some diseases were on the rise. Imagine how beneficial it would be to the human race if we could detect the trends or seasonality of the disease. In this project, I aim to conduct a United States data time series analysis of eleven disease categories, including Autoimmune, Bacterial, Cardiovascular, Chronic, Genetic, Infectious, Metabolic, Neurological, Parasitic, Respiratory, and Viral, starting from the year 2000 until 2024 by using the ARIMA model. Afterward, I also aim to predict the mortality rate in all disease categories by using the other 18 features using a dynamic panel data model. The features for predicting disease mortality include Country, Prevalence rate, Incidence rate, Age group, Gender, Population Affected, Health care Access, Doctors per 1000, Hospital Beds per 1000, Treatment type, Average treatment cost, Availability of vaccine treatment, Recovery rate, DALYs (Disability-Adjusted Life Years, a measure of disease burden), Improvement in 5 years, per capita income, Education index, Urbanization rate.

## Significance
The significance of being able to detect the disease lies in the fact that medical staff can be prepared to allocate resources to the particular category of disease. By having a predictive healthcare system, we can lower the mortality rates of specific diseases through preventative measures. In the United States, the cost of healthcare is expensive, but the life expectancy is less than in other countries that have more affordable healthcare (Nolte E, 2008). A healthcare system focused more on diagnosis than prevention would not do well at the large population level and would not encourage the general public to maintain a healthy and good quality of life. The concept of predictive health consists of defining health as a whole experience that is not mere absence of disease, unhealth is defined as any deviation from health, and applying quality and cost-effective intervention to improve quality of life in a whole population (Brigham, 2010).

# Narrative and Insights

## Major Outbreak of the 2000s 
The Human race faces a new era in the 2000s with the West Nile Virus, which is transmitted by mosquito bites (Moran-Perez, 2025). The countries with warmer temperatures are more prone to outbreaks. The duration of the West Nile Virus outbreak lasted three years. In that duration, there were 4,156 cases and 284 deaths in America. After that, humans faced a bigger viral respiratory illness globally, which was SARS-CoV beginning in 2003 and MERS-CoV in 2012. SARS-CoV caused the death of 774 people and 858 deaths (Mayo Clinic, 2021). Even though humans have persevered through many viral illnesses at this point, Coronavirus-19 will be the biggest outbreak of the 21st century. COVID-19 is similar to SARS and MERS in that they belong to a larger family of coronaviruses that cause upper-respiratory tract illness in humans (National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, 2024). COVID-19 is different from SARS and MERS because they are more infectious and virulent than the other two. The total number of deaths is approximately seven million from COVID-19 (Worldometer, 2024).

## Story of United States Disease’s Mortality
Based on the history of the mean mortality of eleven disease categories in the United States, we have seen that the mortality rates are always fluctuating around the mean, and there are no consistent trends across all the categories. Viral disease category is the one with a clear upward trend throughout the time, which is due to the COVID-19 pandemic in recent years and SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV in the early 200s. By applying the ARIMA model to the timeseries, we have learned that mortality from autoimmune, bacterial, metabolic, parasitic, and respiratory disease types cannot be determined from only their past values and shocks. On the other hand, chronic, genetic disease, and infectious disease mean mortality rate can be modeled by past values, and cardiovascular, neurological, and viral diseases can be modeled by past shocks. Based on the out-of-sample validation, the disease category that can be modeled and has the best prediction of future mean mortality rate is Cardiovascular disease.

## Story of Global Disease’s Mortality
We have explored the past history of disease’s mean mortality in the twenty countries and found that not every country experiences the same trends. In the 2000s, there were many major outbreaks of respiratory disease viruses, but not every country's mortality rate of viral or respiratory diseases was affected by this. Therefore, we are investigating whether external factors have any influence on the differences in mortality rate among twenty countries by using dynamic panel data on fixed effect, between, and random models. There are no significant effects of the external factors and past lag of the data itself on the mean mortality rate in fixed-effect and random models. On the other hand, the first lag of mean mortality rate, mean income, mean urbanization rate, and mean recovery rate of the between models are statistically significant on the mean mortality rate. Moreover, the between model is also the best performer in predicting the****
